In the 14th Century, The tutinama was translated from a classical Sanskrit script into Persian by a sufi saint Nakhsabi.
Under Emperor Akbar’s instructions, 52 miniature illustrations were made for each short story by two artists named Mir Sayyid Ali and Abdus Samad.
In 1801, a lexicographer named Francis Gladwin translated the text into English.
The tale starts off with the emperor of China dreaming about an unknown queen and becoming intoxicated by her beauty and the mystery behind her identity.
He commands his vizier to paint her portrait and ask travellers passing by if they recognize her.
The vizier comes across a traveller who informed him that she is the Queen of Rum and recounts the story of why she refuses to take a husband.
On the tree was nest of eggs guarded by a hen and a peacock.
Once lit with fire, the Queen closely watched.
The hen stayed with her eggs and perished with her nest, while the peacock flew away to safety.
This shocked the Queen as it represented the faithlessness of men.
After finally finding out who the women in the portrait was, the vizier informs the Emperor about the Queen of Rum.
However, the Emperor is still adamant on winning the affections of the Queen, despite her perversion about men.
So, they came up with a plan to send the Vizier to the Queen of Rum’s court as an official painter.
The Queen hires the vizier to make paintings for her court.
Little did the Queen know, the vizier was conspiring by making the same portrait of the Emperor of China over and over again.
This leads the Queen to get infatuated by the man in the portraits.
The vizier tells the Queen a story that is a replication of her own.
Telling her that the Emperor has refused the company of women.
The Emperor sits atop his balcony and looks out into the wild, he witnesses the river overflowing.
A passage from Gladwin’s translation describes the scene which unfolded before the Emperor,
it states, “suddenly, the river overflowed its banks, when the doe, not having resolution to face the water, separated herself … the buck, having more natural affection staid there with the fawn and was drowned.”
Upon hearing this, the Queen was amazed with the Emperor due to their similar experiences.
The Queen said to the vizier “the Emperor’s case is parallel to mine” and asked for a union.
By the next day, an ambassador was sent to the Emperor of China who offered the consent to marry the Queen of Rum.
Resulting in the marriage between the Emperor and Queen.
Persian interpterion of Indian texts led to a beautiful compilation of two unique and distinct styles which is evident in the Tutinama.
By blending in Indian and Iranian styles, the manuscript was a huge success.
One of the artists praised for his ability to bring naturalism to objects, which was unknown to South Asian art and is strongly present in this short story.